feat: add hwa doc for apple platforms (#875)
jellyfin/jellyfin.org: docs/general/administration/hardware-acceleration/apple.md

---
uid: admin-hardware-acceleration-apple
title: Apple Mac
---

# HWA Tutorial On Mac

This tutorial guides you on setting up full video hardware acceleration on Apple Macs via VideoToolbox.

## Acceleration Methods

[VideoToolbox](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/videotoolbox) is the only available method on macOS.

To achieve full acceleration, [Metal](https://developer.apple.com/metal/) is required.

## Tone-mapping Methods

Hardware accelerated HDR to SDR tone-mapping is supported on all Macs from 2017 and later, with the exception of the MacBook Air (13-inch, 2017).

There are two different methods that can be used. Pros and cons are listed below:

1. **Metal**

   - Pros: Supports Dolby Vision P5, detailed fine-tuning options.

>    - Cons: Slower on low end GPU, especially on Intel iGPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Cons: Slower on low end GPUs, especially on Intel iGPUs.
```

2. **VideoToolbox Native**

   - Pros: Lower power consumption, less dependency on GPU performance, good visual quality without manual fine-tuning.

   - Cons: Lack of tuning options, does not support Dolby Vision P5.

When both methods are enabled, VideoToolbox Native will be used for most videos, and Metal will only be used as a fallback for Dolby Vision Profile 5 videos.

## Select System Hardware

Hardware accelerated transcoding is supported on all Macs that support [VideoToolbox](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/videotoolbox). This includes most 2011 and later Macs.<sup>*</sup>

Full acceleration is available on most Macs from 2017 and later, with the exception of the MacBook Air (13-inch, 2017).

To have native Apple Silicon support, Jellyfin server 10.9.0+ and `jellyfin-ffmpeg6` 6.0.1-5 or higher is required.

While hardware acceleration via VideoToolbox might work on older series Macs, it is not officially supported.

> <sup>*</sup> VideoToolbox may fallback to software decoding/encoding or stop working when the task exceeds its hardware capability. The older your Mac, the more this will occur. Macs from 2017 and later are strongly recommended.

Reviewer: The info in later sections strongly suggest that Apple SIlicon Macs are preferred. Should be listed here as well.

### Transcode H.264

AVC / H.264 8-bit is still widely used due to its excellent compatibility. Most GPUs after 2011 can decode and encode it.

Any VideoToolbox-supported Mac supports decoding and encoding H.264 8-bit.

### Transcode HEVC

HEVC / H.265 remains the first choice for storing 4K 10-bit, HDR and Dolby Vision video. It has mature software encoding support thanks to [x265](https://x265.readthedocs.io/en/master/), as well as the widely implemented hardware encoding support in most GPUs released after 2016.

Macs from 2017 and later, excluding the MacBook Air (13-inch, 2017), support decoding and encoding HEVC.

### Transcode AV1

There is no hardware accelerated path for AV1 on macOS at the moment. Although the M3 series added AV1 decoding support, [ffmpeg does not support it yet](https://trac.ffmpeg.org/ticket/10642).

### Performance Consideration

> An Apple Silicon-based Mac is preferred in most cases. Even an entry-level M1 can handle three 4K 24fps Dolby Vision HEVC 10-bit transcoding tasks simultaneously while performing tone-mapping to SDR.<sup>1</sup> <sup>2</sup>

Reviewer: What are the cases that Apple silicon macs aren't preferred?

Author: In a very marginal case, such as someone owning a high-end Intel Mac Pro with multiple GPUs added and disregarding power consumption entirely, it's possible that such a setup might perform better on multi-session transcodes and tone-mapping. However, since I haven't tested this kind of hardware at all, I'm not very sure about its performance. There are also other possible edge cases, such as someone wanting to use the CPU based encoding for specific reasons, where CPU-based HEVC encoding is much better supported on x86_64 platforms. Additionally, there may be other cases that I cannot think of at the moment. Those cases are too edge that I don't even want to document them here.

Reviewer: Fair

The "Max" variant chips come with an additional video encoding engine. VideoToolbox can utilize this extra engine even when there is only a single transcoding session, enabling support for 4K 120fps transcoding and tone-mapping.<sup>1</sup>

> The "Ultra" variant chips feature 2 video decoding engines and 4 video encoding engines, effectively doubling the capability compared to the "Max" variant chips.

Reviewer: So Max has 2x media perf of normal and Pro, and Ultra has 2x perf of Max?

Author: Not quite. The Max only doubles the encoder of the normal and Pro variants. The Ultra doubles both the decoder and encoder of the Max. In real-life performance, it could be close to the 2x increase as you described, as the decoder decodes faster than the encoder can encode. My M1 Max runs at 1.75x the performance of the M1 when encoding 4K videos.

On legacy Intel Macs, you may encounter performance issues with tone-mapping using Metal on 4K videos if your Mac doesn't have an AMD GPU. However, it is still adequate for transcoding SDR videos.

<sup>1</sup> Using prefer speed encoder preset.

> <sup>2</sup> The simultaneous session count is a soft limit. You can run more sessions if you are willing to accept the per-session performance trade-offs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<sup>2</sup> The simultaneous session count is a soft limit.
```
Telling users they can run more sessions means users overloading the media engine with too many streams asking why their video is stuttering

Author: That's why I said "if you are willing to accept the per-session performance trade-offs".

Perhaps changing it into a more clear statement to tell the user what will happen is better than just removing this sentence like:

"You can run more sessions if you want, but the transcoding performance of each session may be reduced to a point where video playback starts to stutter."

Reviewer: Could work as well, but make it clear to the users what the consequences of overloading the media engine are

## macOS Setups

**macOS 12 and later** are officially supported. Older versions might work, but are not supported.

### Configure

- Enable VideoToolbox in Jellyfin and uncheck unsupported codecs.

>   - Disable `MPEG4`, `MPEG2`, and `VC-1`, as VideoToolbox lacks a hardware-accelerated decoding path for these codecs.

Reviewer 2: TBH you can eliminate these legacy hw codecs in the server and web. I don't really believe Apple will introduce them in the future.

Author: We also need to perform some server-side hacks to revert those options if the user enabled them before.

These options have been available for a long time and for a reason. Previously, ffmpeg allowed software fallback for all codecs, and these legacy codecs would use VideoToolbox's software fallback route. However, now ffmpeg only allows fallback for HEVC, and these codecs will error out because VT session creation would fail.

Is such change still good for 10.9?

Reviewer 2: We need a codec panel that can be checked automatically. At that time, the existing decoder/encoder settings will be discarded and Jellyfin will be automatically set based on the hardware probing results.

So deleting these codecs should have no impact.
https://github.com/jellyfin/jellyfin/blob/1124da5428b4cb0e26133f636b27634723026513/MediaBrowser.Controller/MediaEncoding/EncodingHelper.cs#L6167-L6175

Author: Updated doc and pushed changes to server: jellyfin/jellyfin#11217 and web: jellyfin/jellyfin-web#5325

There are two different methods that can be used. Pros and cons are listed below:

1. **Metal**

   - Pros: Supports Dolby Vision P5, detailed fine-tuning options.

   - Cons: Slower on low end GPUs, especially on Intel iGPUs.

2. **VideoToolbox Native**

   - Pros: Lower power consumption, less dependency on GPU performance, good visual quality without manual fine-tuning.

   - Cons: Lack of tuning options, does not support Dolby Vision P5.

When both methods are enabled, VideoToolbox Native will be used for most videos, and Metal will only be used as a fallback for Dolby Vision Profile 5 videos.

## Select System Hardware

Hardware accelerated transcoding is supported on all Macs that support [VideoToolbox](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/videotoolbox). This includes most 2011 and later Macs.<sup>*</sup>

Full acceleration is available on most Macs from 2017 and later, with the exception of the MacBook Air (13-inch, 2017).

To have native Apple Silicon support, Jellyfin server 10.9.0+ and `jellyfin-ffmpeg6` 6.0.1-5 or higher is required.

While hardware acceleration via VideoToolbox might work on older series Macs, it is not officially supported.

> If your Mac does not have an internal display, you may need to connect it to a monitor or use an HDMI dummy plug to prevent the GPU from being throttled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Mac does not have an internal display, you may need to connect it to a monitor or use a dummy plug to prevent the GPU from being throttled.
```
There are dummy plugs for other display interfaces.

Author: Well I can accept this suggestions, but I have to say it is either HDMI or USB-C for desktop Macs after 2017 and the USB-C one cost more usually.

<sup>1</sup> Using prefer speed encoder preset.

<sup>2</sup> The simultaneous session count is a soft limit. You can run more sessions if you want, but the transcoding performance of each session may be reduced to a point where video playback starts to stutter.

## macOS Setups

**macOS 12 and later** are officially supported. Older versions might work, but are not supported.

### Configure

- Enable VideoToolbox in the Jellyfin Dashboard under the Playback section and deselect unsupported codecs for your Mac.
- Check `Enable VideoToolbox Tone mapping` if you want to use VideoToolbox native tone-mapping.
- Check `Enable Tone mapping` if you want to use Metal-based tone-mapping.
- Optionally, select an `Encoding Preset`. The `veryslow`, `slower`, `slow`, and `medium` presets prioritize quality, while `fast`, `faster`, `veryfast`, `superfast`, and `ultrafast` prioritize speed. The default `Auto` setting prioritizes speed.

### Verify

1. Play a video in the Jellyfin web client and trigger video transcoding by setting a lower resolution or bitrate.

2. Open the "Activity Monitor" and search for ffmpeg.

> 3. If ffmpeg is not using a few hundred percent CPU, then hardware acceleration is working.
> 
> :::note
> 
> It would be normal if you see the GPU usage close to 0. For pure transcoding, everything is performed on a dedicated accelerator, and that will not count as GPU usage under macOS.
> 
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If ffmpeg is not using a few hundred percent CPU, then hardware acceleration is working. It is normal to see the GPU usage close to 0. For pure transcoding, everything is performed on a dedicated accelerator, and that will not count as GPU usage under macOS.
```
Doesn't need to be an admonition

1. **OpenCL**

   - Pros: Supports Dolby Vision P5, detailed fine-tuning options.

   - Cons: Slower, requires more powerful GPUs.

2. **VideoToolbox Native**

   - Pros: Lower power consumption, less dependency on GPU performance, good visual quality without manual fine-tuning.

   - Cons: Lack of tuning options, potential performance issues on Intel Macs, does not support Dolby Vision P5.

When both methods are enabled, VideoToolbox Native will be used for most videos, and OpenCL will only be used as a fallback for Dolby Vision Profile 5 videos.

## Select System Hardware

Hardware accelerated transcoding is supported on all Macs that support [VideoToolbox](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/videotoolbox). This includes most 2011 and later Macs.<sup>*</sup>

Full acceleration is available on most Macs from 2017 and later, with the exception of the MacBook Air (13-inch, 2017).

To have native Apple Silicon support, Jellyfin server 10.9.0+ and `jellyfin-ffmpeg6` 6.0.1-4 or higher is required.

While hardware acceleration via VideoToolbox might work on older series Macs, it is not officially supported.

> <sup>*</sup> VideoToolbox may fallback to software decoding/encoding when the task exceeds its hardware capability. The older your Mac, the more this will occur. Macs from 2017 and later are strongly recommended.

Reviewer 2: Even if the `allow_sw` option is [disabled by default](https://github.com/FFmpeg/FFmpeg/blob/c31d2326560087b80f8523b27060ad6388369cac/libavcodec/videotoolboxenc.c#L2849), will it automatically fall back to software encoding on partially supported devices?

Author: Both encoding and decoding have fallback behaviors. For encoding it will error out, but for decoding, the default option is to [allow software decoding for HEVC videos](https://github.com/FFmpeg/FFmpeg/blob/c31d2326560087b80f8523b27060ad6388369cac/libavcodec/videotoolbox.c#L816).

Reviewer 2: One more question: Is there an artificial limit on the number of concurrent encoding sessions on Apple like NVIDIA NVENC?

Author: There is no artificial limit, but there are some hard limits on certain models due to hardware limitations. On some ancient Intel Macs, the limit is only 1, as Intel could not perform concurrent encoding at that time. This should not be an issue on modern Macs anymore; I've run approximately 40 sessions without encountering any problems.

Reviewer 2: Good to know. I remember the Plex documentation mentioned a limit of up to 1 concurrent encoding. It might be worth add this in our documentation to avoid confusion.

Author: The problem is, I don't know exactly on which model this was an issue and since when this limitation was no longer applicable.

Reviewer 2: Just put what we already know into the docs. And emphasize that we have only verified this on Apple Silicon, newer Intel based Macs may also support this but use it at your own risk.

This is much better than Plex documents anyway.

> macOS is only capable of hardware-accelerated encoding of 1 video at a time. This is a platform limitation from Apple.

https://support.plex.tv/articles/115002178853-using-hardware-accelerated-streaming/

Author: Then I think just change "VideoToolbox may fallback to software decoding/encoding when the task exceeds its hardware capability." to " VideoToolbox may fallback to software decoding/encoding or stop working when the task exceeds its hardware capability." is enough. Users should not care about a historical limitation too much.

Reviewer 2: That should be enough. We will add automatic fallback to software transcoding on the server side in the future.

---
uid: admin-hardware-acceleration-apple
title: Apple Mac
---

# HWA Tutorial On Mac

This tutorial guides you on setting up full video hardware acceleration on Apple Macs via VideoToolbox.

## Acceleration Methods

[VideoToolbox](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/videotoolbox) is the only available method on macOS.

> To achieve full acceleration, [Metal](https://developer.apple.com/metal/) and OpenCL is also required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve full acceleration, [Metal](https://developer.apple.com/metal/) and OpenCL are also required.
```

## Tone-mapping Methods

> Hardware accelerated HDR/DV to SDR tone-mapping is supported on most Macs from 2017 and later, with the exception of the MacBook Air (13-inch, 2017).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hardware accelerated HDR to SDR tone-mapping is supported on all Macs from 2017 and later, with the exception of the MacBook Air (13-inch, 2017).
```

There are two different methods that can be used. Pros and cons are listed below:

1. **OpenCL**

   - Pros - Supports Dolby Vision P5, detailed fine-tuning options.

   - Cons - Slower, requires more powerful GPUs.

2. **VideoToolbox Native**

   - Pros: Lower power consumption, less dependency on GPU performance, good visual quality without manual fine-tuning.

>    - Cons: Lack of tuning options, potential performance issues on Intel Macs.

Reviewer: Is there any reason for using dashes for OpenCL but colons for VideoToolbox Native? They should be the same and follow the style of other documentation pages.
Cons for VideoToolbox Native should also include lack of support for DoVi P5.

:::note

When both methods are enabled, VideoToolbox Native will be used for most videos, and OpenCL will only be used as a fallback for Dolby Vision Profile 5 videos.

> :::

Reviewer: This doesn't have to be an admonition.

## Select System Hardware

> Hardware accelerated transcoding is supported on all Macs that support [VideoToolbox](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/videotoolbox). This includes most 2011 and later Macs.<sup>*</sup>
> 
> Full acceleration is available on most Macs from 2017 and later, with the exception of the MacBook Air (13-inch, 2017).
> 
> To have native Apple Silicon support, Jellyfin server 10.9.0+ and the latest `jellyfin-ffmpeg6` is required.
> 
> <sup>*</sup> On very old Macs, VideoToolbox may fallback to software decoding/encoding. Macs from 2017 and later is strongly recommend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hardware accelerated transcoding is supported on all Macs that support [VideoToolbox](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/videotoolbox). This includes most 2011 and later Macs.<sup>*</sup>

Full acceleration is available on most Macs from 2017 and later, with the exception of the MacBook Air (13-inch, 2017).

To have native Apple Silicon support, Jellyfin server 10.9 or newer and `jellyfin-ffmpeg6` is required.

<sup>*</sup> On very old Macs, VideoToolbox may fallback to software decoding/encoding. Macs from 2017 and later is strongly recommend.
```

The exact minimum version of jellyfin-ffmpeg6 should be included.
Also, you mentioned that VideoToolbox may fallback to software for older macs. How old exactly are we talking about here?

Author: It is hard to tell "how old". Maybe I can just say "when the encoding task exceeds then capability of the hardware"?

Reviewer: That could work as well

:::note

While hardware acceleration via VideoToolbox might work on older series Macs, it is not officially supported.

> :::

Reviewer: This really doesn't have to be an admonition and can be part of the body with some rewording

### Transcode H.264

> AVC / H.264 8-bit is still widely used due to its excellent compatibility. All Intel GPUs that support QSV can decode and encode it.

Reviewer: There exist macs out there that don't have Intel Integrated graphics (eg. Mac Pro, iMac Pro). What about these macs?

Any VideoToolbox-supported Mac supports decoding and encoding H.264 8-bit.

### Transcode HEVC

HEVC / H.265 remains the first choice for storing 4K 10-bit, HDR and Dolby Vision video. It has mature software encoding support thanks to [x265](https://x265.readthedocs.io/en/master/), as well as the widely implemented hardware encoding support in most GPUs released after 2016.

Macs from 2017 and later, excluding the MacBook Air (13-inch, 2017), support decoding and encoding HEVC.

### Transcode AV1

There is no hardware accelerated path for AV1 on macOS at the moment. Although the M3 series added AV1 decoding support, [ffmpeg does not support it yet](https://trac.ffmpeg.org/ticket/10642).

## macOS Setups

> Although there is no hard requirement for the macOS version, we recommend **macOS 12 and later**.
> 
> Jellyfin's custom ffmpeg may work on earlier versions, but the functionality cannot be guaranteed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**MacOS 12 and later** are officially supported. Older versions might work, but are not supported.
```

I would disagree with not having a hard minimum OS version requirement that we support. Or else we might get some guy with ancient hardware and ancient OS versions coming to matrix or the forum for support.
